We had at that point in a very quick period, less
than 120 days, the capability to do planning a la
Florida or any other mandatory planning state.
That's what we're embroiled in now, trying to
educate the people involved in the system. It's
hard to get everybody up to speed as to what that
means. We're so used to zoning being planning
around this part of the world that it's taken a
massive educational participatory structure.
We could have as professionals prepared a plan,
but it won't work in Austin. And a mandatory plan
would not work unless there was a very massive and
structured way educate people on the
relationships between planning, regulation,
the consistency doctrine, adequate service and
facilities ordinances, and all the kinds of
techniques of planning and growth management as I
believe in them. Let's talk about the consistency
doctrine for a minute. I don't know where that term
doctrine appeared. And I'm not even sure if it is a
doctrine. And I don't think it's been pinned on
anyone yet. But it does remind me of Oregon and the
mandated planning procedures in Oregon. And all
of their, quote, acknowledged, unquote, plans
that have to be promulgated by cities as well as
counties. And that if they don't act accordingly,
then they're open to lawsuits. Right. The
question then is, when
is zoning and other development action
considered to be consistent with an adopted
comprehensive plan? And what constitutes
consistency? What about the time lag between
short-range and medium-range and long-range?
These are questions that I don't find adequately
answered in the literature. Well, I tend to agree
with that. There's kind of two ways to talk about
consistency. My first bath in consistency came
from what I was seeing happen in California,
perhaps Oregon also, but I didn't follow the
Oregon system that well. But I was repeatedly told
by peers at conferences, just in general
networking talk and discussion over a few years,
that consistency had become interpreted in
California Your document had to be internally
consistent, you know, one policy among another,
water to sewer to wastewater to parks, all that
kind of, that's very logical to understand. The
plan should be internally consistent, very
rational approach. But what was coming out of some
of the mandatory plan litigation in California
was that you were getting lawsuits by either the
developer or the neighborhood or the
environmentalist challenging legislative
decisions not being consistent with their plan.
Well, that was kind of a new phenomenon. I haven't
talked about 10 or 15 years ago even. That was kind
of a new phenomenon when you're challenging
zoning. You don't challenge planning. You accept
the absence of it, perhaps. And just following
that whole discussion over a period of months and
years that that people could actually overturn a
zoning decision because they found a council did
not follow their plan. Or even better, that a
developer could get his denial overturned
because the council had ignored its plan that said
he could do that, or something to that effect. I
mean, the two-edged sword of the consistency
doctrine I found very, very interesting. The
issue of timing. became very focused in Florida
when the legislation there is replete with
consistency requirements. In Broward County,
where I spent my sojourn, the interpretation in
Broward County by the county commission and their
plan, which ruled over 29 cities as well as all the
unincorporated jurisdiction down there, was you
brought your plan and your zoning consistent
within one year. Within one year? Because Florida
statutes required in a little phrase that zoning
shall be consistent with a plan within one year of
its amendment. Well, they used that to say if we
plan the reaches of the county to have commercial
out here 20 years from now, you go ahead and zone it
now. Now, that was a... And we spent one of our whole
continuing processes was staff initiated zoning
to conformity. We were continuously preparing
studies, initiating county commission
rezonings to consistency so the zoning map would
look like plan map. And that is a problem. Now,
that's a problem that I've had to deal with in other
arenas as we moved into the land development code
regulatory systems the impact fee systems which
i've had considerable experience with because
the timing of adequacy and the delivery of
services and the moratorium that's implied if
services aren't adequate you cannot in the
consistency doctorate grant the project on the
other hand if you find those searches adequate or
pay an impact fee, you can approve the project.
That didn't get at the timing issue, but it got at an
issue about what is a plan. How can you make a
roadway consistent with a plan in the future when
we know zoning traditionally is planning? So you
may show it on a map today and plan a road for it, but
what really going to be out there 10 or 15 years from
now may not equal the capacity that you've built
into your roads and all that. So I've dealt with
that. And I have a style of planning theory we're
going to try to embed in the Austin plans,
comprehensive land use element, that I think
bridges that gap. And it's not mapping the
multicolored yellows, reds for residential and
commercial in the traditional sense that you'd
have to say, well, that's commercial, so zone it
today. I don't believe in that one-to-one
correlation. I believe in the timing, long range,
and short range. But I have a different value and a
different philosophy of what the land use plan
should be. The land use element of the
comprehensive plan. It shouldn't just be a
surrogate zoning map. And that's what it's
traditionally been. Well, that's what it's been
in Texas as well as other states. And going way back
to the model land use planning, act of the
Department of Commerce with Secretary Hoover and
the consequences of confusion that that
generated in the planning profession for
decades.
The planners themselves got confused between the
land use element and the zoning ordinance. For
example, Harlem Bartholomew would from time to
time insert a zoning ordinance into his plan
documents for various communities, thinking
that that would take care of land use. We've not
entirely emerged from that, I suspect. No, no. And
see, it's that whole philosophy that made me
skeptical about coming back to this part of the
world again. Well, Norman, I'd like to have you
elucidate on your concepts of what comprehensive
plans is and how it relates to implementation
devices. Well, we are working on a report here to go
to our land use task group, part of our big
participatory structure that's involved in the
Austin plan process. How many are in that? Well,
there's 87 officially appointed council
representatives representing nine political
interests in the community they are decomposed
into 14 various task groups working on water
wastewater environment land development code
house you know all the elements of the plan okay is
it and they have appointed on to the you know six or
eight of each of those are on one of these task
groups then from the bottom up there's other
resource people, board and commission members,
so you flesh out about 20, 30 people in any one of
these groups. I see. It's very elaborate. We can
give you the process document, how these things
operate. How many, is there any geographic
representation by neighborhood? Yes, yes.
They've got the largest block of representatives
in the process. That's similar to the Austin
Tomorrow process. Similar, but different.
Because what's different about it, it does have a
broad vested interest representation from not
just the neighborhoods and environmentalists,
which I have been told Austin-Tamara
deteriorated into. The big hitters pulled out of
the process and went on and started doing muds. And
so for whatever reason, I think this has... The
whole thrust of our participatory structure is to
reach consensus among the groups that have never
sat down and talked to each other. So it's
hopefully balanced to do that. That's the
question that's still out there. OK. What about
your concept of the content of a comprehensive
plan for us? Well, I truly believe it needs to be a
public goals policy document. although it's
going to be a very thick document, I think. Will it
be a general plan or will it be more or less of a
development plan? It's going to be a hybrid. A
hybrid. It's going to look somewhat traditional
and it's going to look rather innovative in some
respects, I hope. Let me back up and tell you what I
think the key is that I hope to embed in the thing if I
have any influence on it. If you take a traditional
land use map, multi-colored map, you pull out and
fold out of tons of plants. They're generalized,
you know, red commercial here, gray industry
here, green for parks, whatever the color coding
system is. The art and science of planters pushing
those blobs around on the map and having them mean
anything quantifiably is rather lacking. We do
acreage and absorptions and projections,
whatever techniques are used. They're pretty
sad, in my opinion. They're good, reasonable
estimates, perhaps. They represent community
beliefs about this is good, we ought to have this
here or that there. What we really do, though, is
back off in the regulatory system And right
ordinances don't have a damn thing to do with
reaching those goals. They have more to do with
whatever the political issue is, an
environmental problem, or right of watershed
ordinance, or got a problem with signs, right of
sign ordinance. But that has no correlation,
really, with achieving the objective of the city
looking like that 20 years from now. And there's
not that good a tie to making sure that capital
investment is being timed and sequenced to make
that plan, because that plan is too general,
perhaps. But if you take that red map and that green
map and that yellow map, my philosophy of how you
bridge this system is to quantify those blobs in a
relationship way. And we've got a rather lengthy
report that we're going to be bringing out here in
the next 90 days or so. In a manner that does not try
to predict the use of every parcel of property in
the planning sphere of jurisdiction in a sense
that it's all at this corner going to be red or green
or blue or whatever the color might be. But to have
those
designations on your plan map represent planned
impact or intensity levels which we have done
quite a bit of research and coming all the way out of
our impact analysis basis in Florida. We've set up
a system that starts very simply. The single
family unit equivalent is not a particularly new
idea. But rather than saying this land supports
three to five single family units, we would say
this has a single family unit equivalent
intensity value. And we also have a scale in there
that says one single family unit is the same as .8
townhouses or .3 duplexes. They're all related
across a scale of traffic impacts initially. Then
quantifiable charts and tables about water
quality and water quantity and sewage quantity
and all these, you know, rather rigorous You've
got a size for water and sewer. They're
impact-related equivalents. Now, you can
bifurcate one of those districts. You could say
everything is equivalent from a traffic point of
view and just have one blob on your mat wouldn't
tell you a thing. But where you want higher
intensity, you'll raise the FAR and scale up
intensities. We have a corollary set of value
systems that relate square footage of office, to
square footages of industry, to square footages
of discrete use types, so that we know that the same
amount of office space in any particular zoning
category will have the same impact. So what we're
trying to plan is the probable future impact, not
the probable zoning that's going to happen there.
But in a mandatory plan system, we'll let zoning
take its place over time as market dictates.
You've got an intensity level. that might permit X
quantity of office, a little less quantity of
retail, same traffic impact, you may choose in
that district to convert to high-rise apartments
equivalent to the same traffic impact. It's that
kind of dimension we're starting to explore. Now,
you are assuming that the traffic impacts are
going to remain constant from current
phenomenon? It's all predicated on, right now,
very traditional relationships like an ITE
schedule, you know, that says a house generates
0.76 trips per day. peak hour or 10 trips per 80.
It's a beginning generalization. I don't care.
You could change that mix any way you want to. I'm
not trying to make it mathematically perfect. I'm
trying to say let's not predict this is going to be
retail and have no way to know how much retail is
going to be there. We're going to fix retail in the
plan at an intensity, at an FAR level. But we're not
going to say that's all it can be there. There could
be apartments there of the same relative impact.
When you say impact, you're talking about traffic
generation impact? Starting first from a traffic
generation point of view. We've had a number of
discussions with various members of the Planning
Commission and others who think, well, that's
ridiculous. There's other impacts. Why don't you
do a multivariate? We squish it all up. You can't
get to the point of quantifying that use and put it
right into your traffic model. You can't quantify
those uses and size of water line if you've made
them all surrogates. You have to start with one
dimension. What's the most serious dimension of
public service? In my opinion, in 22 years, it's
roads and traffic. Such an enormous lead time,
such a massive amount of land to acquire, and the
greatest capital cost, Your roads are fairly
going to be fixed. The only question is how large
they need to be and can you regulate through a plan
land use intensities that will never exceed that
planned roadway capacity. Yeah, you can under a
system like we're talking about. You can't under
the two-dimensional traditional multicolored
land use map. So that's the, you may disagree, but
that's the direction we believe we're taking
because it takes you then from a mandatory impact
planning system to a flexible zoning system you
can make regulations do what regulation ought to
do policy decisions in the plan right now every
zoning decision it's immaterial what the
requirements of the zoning ordinance are it's an
original decision by city council where that's
good at that location you know it's planning by
individual ad hoc case well This is interesting
for me to hear this because when I started
planning, there were no such things as tables of
traffic generation factors. We had to conduct our
own field research. Absolutely. And we need to do
that today. Yeah, we need to update it. We need to do
a lot of that kind of stuff. We need to localize and
do, in my opinion, we need to have the capability to
replicate ITE tables here on a biannual or
quarterly basis. Or just say, hey, it was changing
in Austin Texas. I mean, our phenomena are not the
same as they are in Washington DC. But it wouldn't
take much to do this just on a spot survey basis
during different times of the year and so forth.
But all I'm saying, we're trying to develop a
planning mapped mandatory land use system that
gives you a capability If this is the consensus of
what this community today wants this city to be,
high intensity here, low intensity there,
traditional neighborhoods here, transit
corridor station locations for light rail here,
we're going to fix those in relative quantity in
plan. You're not going to exceed these. Now, you
can move across the variety of mix from retail to
industry to housing at the zoning change time, the
compatibility time, 20 years from now but we can
plan now the roadway system if you achieve the
upper limit that will be satisfactory and then we
can back down and we can also stepwise figure of all
the potential uses in there which one's the most
water demanding which one's the most sewer
demanding and back into a planning methodology it
can it can be automated quite frankly oh yeah And as
you make planning amendments from year to year or
however, you can also produce it now needs to amend
the roadway. If you want to change the plan and up
the density, the consistency doctrine tells me I
got to go back and change the roadway plan. I got to
change the water plan. I got to add more parks. And
you do what planners have always been wanting to
do, relate facilities to planning, adequate
services. That's my latest. I'm out of the impact
fee game, and I'm into the planning impact. And to
show to the commission and the council what the
consequences would be of making these decisions.
Absolutely. I don't care personally as a planner
to tell a community, this should be a commercial
shopping center, this should be a nine-story
high-rise. No, cut it to six. I don't like the
zoning game. This community needs to decide what
it wants to be. If it wants to change that, we need to
be able to show them Don't just change that zoning
without knowing that you're going to have such
congestion here and the consistency doctrine
requires you to find a way to change immediately
the roadway plan. We're going to make decision
making, make some tough choices in the future
instead of just playing with the old traditional
game.
That's a pretty tough agenda. It is. And nobody
knows that's the agenda here. Except me. But I
believe that's what the public wants out of its
governmental decision-making systems. Well, I
think that they also want something more than
that, Norman. I think that they want professional
judgments to be exercised in terms of
recommendations to the city through the council
and the commission regarding the location of
activities. Sure. And I think that role is
constant in the evolution and the assistance and
the preparation of the plan, the staffing of the
regulations, the staffing of the... I mean, it
never ends there. It's bound to be. But what we
have, if we have a planning system that's
theoretically perfect, is what I'm talking
about, we have that impermanent constitution
that planning has always been alleged to be. It's
that backdrop against... Make the decisions in
relationship to your plan. This plan is what it is
today. It's going to change. Economic conditions
are going to change. ITEs are going to change. Cars
are going to change. Travel patterns are going to
change. We can change the plan. And we can change
the plan consistently to respond to public policy
by the vote of the council to change that plan. Do
you have in mind, after adoption, and you go into
the next phase after adoption, do you have in mind
anything like annual review and update?
Absolutely. As a matter of fact, our charter
stipulates that there will be, didn't set the
period, but they said there'll be
monitoring and at least, I think it says in there,
five-year periodic major review. Yeah, that's
excellent. We had in Florida, in the Breyer County
system, we had a system of one-year plan
amendments. If your zoning wasn't consistent,
you got denied. You could file for a plan amendment
and wait for it to cycle up. And what you did is we
took large planning areas, got all plan
amendments in, held one staff report public
hearing on all of those, and you amended the plan at
one time or didn't amend it or didn't. But it was
done in a comprehensive basis. We have weekly
rezonings in College State. Oh, I know that. But
that's because zoning is planning in Texas. You
know what I mean? Oh, of course I know. What I wanted
to ask you, what would be a neat trick would be if you
could schedule those annual updates so that they
would be ready and completed in time for the city
manager to use them as a basis for formulating his
annual budget. Oh, no question about it. As a
matter of fact, we've already talked about
linking our annexation program, our capital
budgeting program, backing it all up in the
process. So all these things happen prior to the
operating budget cycle. I mean, there's so much
depending upon that. Then that would put planning
in a leadership role. Well, it certainly...
Rather than a reactive role. Absolutely. It would
put it at the right arm of... municipal management
in an intelligent management function where it
should be. Right. Part of a city administration.
Not just another line operation down there to
implement something. Well, I think that the tie
between city administration and city planning is
long overdue to be strengthened. And managers, if
they have a good planning director who is
sympathetic to this as well, can realize that
planning can be an enormous tool for it. I know. You
hear that said by city managers every time they
speak at conferences. But you don't hear city
managers speak like that to city managers at the
ICMA conference. You don't. City managers are
politically pragmatic beasts. They know where.
the zoning case is, and they know who owns the land,
and they live in that arena of politics. And in
short range. And it's just as short range as the
people who hire them. And the planter forever is
caught in a box, in my opinion, except I've had the
rare privilege of working for a few city managers
that do meet the mold. Well, Lloyd Cookingham in
Kansas City was probably the best example of a city
manager that understood the potential
relationship between the planning process and
city management. But there aren't a whole lot of
Cookinghams around. Yeah. Well, I totally agree.
Norman, the timing on the Austin Plan project.
Would you go through the major points in time you
anticipated? Sure. It was a consciously
conceived program designed to take
approximately two years. It took about six months
longer to get initiated than we had planned on
because of change in council election, the whole
timing of the thing, and the need for the new
council to just get up to speed with their job
before they got on with it. the process of
appointments. Council elections came in the
middle of trying to get this process started. So it
wasn't until almost a year after council
elections in 85 that they finished all the
appointments and we officially kicked the
process off with a big meeting out at one of the
hotels and started all that formal deliberation.
We're now... Has the change in the council had any
consequences for the program? Only that hiatus,
slow down period, it put it behind schedule in my
mind, probably six months. But
you have, in my opinion, you have to give a lot more
credit than people are willing to do to the
original Mullen Council, the perceived
developer controlled council, in which all of
this took place. Northwest Plan, the Charter
Amendment. A lot of things took place in an era
under a council that was perceived to be
anti-neighborhood, pro-development. Some
people say, well, they were just doing that
because of the enormous visibility in the
upcoming elections. They were playing to the
pro-planning neighborhood mood and then got
swept out of office anyway. I don't know whether
that's true, but... The new council is not, well,
it just took longer to get up to speed with them, and
they are so slow to make decisions, I mean, any
decision out there, so it's a different council,
but still it's a very supportive council, I mean,
to say that. Anyway, we're about nine months into
the process. I've alluded to the structure of
appointees and task groups supported by staff,
the relevant departments, planning's lead
agency, and all these various elements groups.
We have a definite process that results in three
milestone reports. The first milestone is
basically, and all groups are through that
process now, is basically an issue definition.
You have to understand, we've got the developers
and the environmentalists and the Hispanics and
the blacks. We've got all the communities sitting
there trying to figure out what's common, what's
good, what's bad, and come up with eventually the
goals and policies in a consensus-making
process. Is this report available now? reports
that thick. I mean, just tons of them. We don't tell
you. You get buried trying to read all of them. It's
not important for this project or my project. So
the first milestone is basically a process of
getting people to work together. We have
facilitators, professional facilitators who
live in Austin, volunteer services, tons. I mean,
night meetings. You know the process is night
meetings out at the wazoo. So the first several
months was a getting to know each other, getting
testing ground among the battling constituent
groups, a beginning to deal with what do you think
the problems of Austin are. The second milestone,
which they're all beginning to approach now,
deals with the definition of these are our values.
The first milestone was issues and values. trying
to get them to focus. Now, what are our goals and
objectives and probable ways to implement those?
Each one of these kind of bleeds across. You can
finish it if you can get there, or you can carry it
over. So now we're beginning to take those values
and problems and define their goal sets, what they
think Austin's vision ought to be, and all this
kind of thing. move as far down that goals,
policies, objectives, and standards as they can.
You've got a housing task group doing this. You've
got water and wastewater. You've got all the
element groups, all dealing with this public
policy and decision consensus piece up front.
Then when they get through that process, they'll
go to milestone three, which is implementation.
techniques and strategies and ordinance
requirements and the teeth of all that you'll have
basically a whole superstructure of consensus
agreement about issues values goals policies
objectives standards and the tools and of course
you got a land use group doing you know their piece
on this evolving this consensus of austin's
vision of what they want this city to be, how they
wanted to get there, the standards that they want
this city to be. You know, they'll cover all the
issues. At that point, as they wrap up their
individual third milestones, we take each of
those elements, and they're staggered over three
and four month periods, into the superstructure
of the ordinance mandated by the Charter, the
Comprehensive Plan Ordinance. And it'll be kind
of a chapter by chapter thing. And we will adopt the
housing component of the plan. And then we'll
adopt whatever else comes on stream. All designed
to be an interim document. All the
interdependencies, just like any other
ordinance. If wastewater comes on and says, you
got something there that doesn't work, we work it
out and then we adopt it. Two of them updated. We
strike old language, so both those are
compatible. Internal consistency piece. And
every element comes on and is adjudicated to be...
And finally you come out with this plan. This is a
first test. But you'll go through a series of
interim element adoptions. And then this will
eventually yield the comprehensive plan. The
final total plan. With plan diagrams and all that.
Yes, and you will have the birth. of the
comprehensive plan. And you know from there it's
annual revisions, articulations, refinements,
changes, and modifications. At least we have that
coherent document to start with. So that you're
really, when you say an interim plan element is
going to be adopted, I think if I'm interpreting
this correctly, what this means then is that what
you're doing is it's sort of like a sketch plan, and
you're going to use this for testing and
adjustment with other elements so that it can be
brought into balance. And then all of those then
would, you're not really going into piecemeal
adoption as such. Well, there's some debates
whether if that might happen. It might happen more
in terms of adopting a sectors land use plan. You
better talk to Alfred Bettman. He'll have some
things to say about that, and so would Ladislaus
Segal. I understand that. But this is based upon
Austin's traditional bias for action. Unquote.
But, Norman, still one could say, I think... It's
not inconceivable that you could do a housing
element
with goals and policies and objectives and
standards and implementation programs that
could be adopted. There's not a lot that will not
have happened in all the interdependencies and
internal consistency of time they get there to
preclude that from happening. Some of the more
intricate ones, land use to transportation, land
use to water, some of the superstructure things,
probably can't just be done in a bag. That's what I
was going to say. I think that your three mandated
elements probably would have to be adopted
simultaneously. Oh, no question. And also, the
whole process was designed to bring on land use,
housing, and infrastructure. That's an
important thing to understand. Sure. And the
process of who got started when has to do with that.
Oh, yeah. Of course, and then, of course, if you
were on the Gulf, you could have a port element or
whatever, but that could come years later. Sure,
absolutely. And it could come about as political
pressures generated. Absolutely, and our
charter provides that. Well, in that sense, it
could be piecemeal, and in that sense, it could be
very realistic in terms of relating or planning to
the decision process. Well, I think it's very
interesting, and I certainly wish you a whole
bunch of success on it. Well, we need a whole bunch
of support now. It's a novel thing. Try to attempt
this. Well, Austin is a tough city for planners.
Unlike any place I've ever worked in 22 years, it is
novel, to say the least.
Are there any other things you would Well, did we
ever get to the end of when the comprehensive plan
might be adopted? The mandate in the mission
statement given to this community participation
group was to have a plan for adoption by within 24
months, which puts it out in like February, March
of 88.
And right now, Unbelievable. We're on schedule.
We had this thing purged out, and we're on
schedule, relatively speaking. Of course, we
haven't got to any real tough inter-group
conflicts yet, because it's all still been at the
pretty general theoretical testing level. I
think that two years for the formulation of a Any
comprehensive plan, let alone something that has
a lot of new approaches in it, is probably minimum.
Oh, I guarantee you it's minimum. I was one of
three. Yeah, I would be more comfortable with
three. But pragmatic politics and a city manager
and others said no way. And that's always there.
Yeah. But the manager is very protective, I hope,
of the comprehensive planning process and not
getting it mixed up with day-to-day planning.
Yes, and actually the organization of the two
departments is by that very design. The
day-to-day stuff, the zoning, the regulatory,
the site plans, the building permits and all that
are all over the land development services and all
that kind of stuff. We're over here doing the plan.
annexation we've got some routine stuff and
basically the whole man-based information
system multi-departmental computer operation i
think it's interesting that you're physically at
some distance from the rest of the city well it's
not by desire but There's no city hall building
that, you know, there's just not a capability to
put people together. We've got pretty quality
space. Actually, I like being removed from the
hectics of that process. There are real needs for
us to talk daily, and we do. Jim Duncan and I. This
process would not work if there weren't two people
as compatible as Jim Duncan and I running current
and long-range planning, in fact. because so much
of what they do has to just do this eventually. And
if you had two competing egos about philosophies
that didn't go down the same track, I mean, it's bad
enough to work with the various departments and
the turfing issues you have in any city. Sure. Now,
when we finish this process, we need to put the two
departments back together. Probably so. Jim, I
want to... Jim... Norman, I want to thank you very
much for your time and for all of the very
interesting ideas. I certainly wish you well.